# Spotify-Network-Analysis-
Analyzed artists’ social networks and implemented regression model to discover factors contributing to the song popularity 

Background
According to the Economist, a weekly ranking of the most popular singles on Billboard Hot 100 in U.S., one-third of hit songs are made by artists’ collaborations. Therefore, we would like to analyze how the collaboration among artists would affect the success of an artist / a song. We focus on Spotify rather than traditional music media, such as radios, because Spotify is a more mature social network. It fulfills the definition of social network feature by allowing users to follow artists and make friends. More importantly, it has large user base (more than 250 million users) to develop a network. Moreover, with its analytics service for music publishers, we could gather organized and credible data from Spotify API easily

Introduction and Research Questions
Does collaboration with other artists necessary bring more streams to an artist on Spotify? Does more collaboration necessarily bring more streams? Or is it whom you collaborate with that matters more for an artist’s popularity on platform? Our study aims to answer the questions above through a combination of network analysis and statistical analysis.
There are four major assumptions of our study:
	The artist collaboration network has a core-periphery structure.
	Artists who collaborate more with other artists (high degree) have higher popularity.
	More centralized artists in the network (higher coreness) have higher popularity.
	Artists’ genre attributes to his success, and similarity (Jaccard similarity) between artists in a track collaboration is related to the popularity as well.
In this report we argue that artist collaboration network indeed has a core-periphery structure. It may be surprising to some of the audiences, but we do not find collaboration with other artists alone bring any positive value to the stream or popularity increase. However, if artists do collaborate with each other, the more they deviate from the general type of artists in the network (general being defined using Jaccard distance), the more popular the collaborated track seems to be. In addition to verifying the assumptions above, we also find during our study that in terms of getting higher popularity, artists with similar fan base (as defined by the number of followers on platform) seems to have more synergy, and this observation holds true for both famous and less popular artists.

Data Preparation
The dataset we use contains 10-year worth of artist, album, and track data for 4,862 artists on Spotify. (10,000 observations per year as limited by Spotify, for 10 years). We used Spotipy-- a lightweight Python library for the Spotify Web API to get the data needed. We have track, artist, as well as album level information such as duration of the track, artists who made the track, popularity of the track, which album it belongs to, type of album it belongs to, number of followers the artist have, popularity of an artist, etc. One of the most important variables we used in the research is the popularity of an artist, and the popularity of an artist is given as a number between 0-100. The artist Ed Sheeran has the popularity 100 across the board since he has the highest number of total streams on Spotify. Other artists’ popularity is calculated as the faction of their total stream compared with that of Ed, Sheeran’s, rounded to an integer value. Popularity equals the artist total streams divided by Ed Sheeran’s Total Streams. As pointed out by Spotify, “The popularity of a track is a value between 0 and 100, with 100 being the most popular. Popularity is based mainly on the total number of playbacks. Duplicate tracks, such as both in a single and in an album, are popularity rated differently.”

Exploratory Data Analysis
We observed a very interesting pattern on the number of different track types being produced. In Exhibition1 we observe that the number of tracks released as single has been increasing since 2009, while the number of compilation album and normal albums shows a decreasing trend. We suspect that this is due to number of independent artists who have limited production capabilities joining Spotify has been increasing and diluted the statistics, but the real reason is both unknown and out of the scope of our research project. 
In Exhibition2, we observed a non-linear relationship between the artist popularity and number of followers an artist has.  Since by the definition of artist popularity, we had an assumption that there is a positive relationship between artist popularity and the number of followers, through EDA we are able to confirm that the relationship is indeed positive and non-linear. In later part of the research we would digger further into this relationship and see how the relationship compares with other centrality measures and Jaccard distance of an artist.
Next, we looked at the distribution of average number of tracks produced by an artist in Exhibition3. It seems most artists produce 25 songs per year or less. The distribution is right skewed, and we find from the original data that the unrealistically large number such as 100 and more songs produced are actually related to movie original soundtracks, not the typical three to four minutes song that we listen to.
Spotify has its own internal algorithms to classify music into different genres, however, that information was never released. What we do have is the genre that an artist in classified into. We can see In Exhibition4 that after grouping (for example, some variations of rock music are all grouped as rock music), we observe the majority of artists on Spotify are classified into Pop (26%), Rap (17%) and Hip Pop (12%). Whether the number of genres an artist is classified into also play a part in an artist popularity will also be studied in our research.

Network Analysis
1. The collaboration among musical artists has an upward trend
We assumed that the collaboration level among musical artist would increase over time with the boom of the Spotify network. However, from both Network-level Centrality Concentration Measure (Exhibit5) and Distribution Table of Edge-level Eigenvector Centrality (Exhibit6), we see that all centrality measurements remain in certain range and have irregular increasing or decreasing trends. Therefore, we will calculate the centrality measure on a yearly basis for our further analysis in order to gain more insight.
To have a deeper understanding of the Spotify Collaboration network, we chose to look down into the network structure in 2012 (highest degree concentration and betweenness) and 2016 (lowest closeness and highest eigenvector). From 2012 and 2016 Network colored by coreless, although it’s hard to say the network is getting denser, we could see that nodes with similar eigenvector seem to get closer. This implies that more-central artists tend to collaborate more with more-central artist and less-central artists tend to collaborate with less central artists. 
         
2. The collaboration network of musical artists has a core-periphery structure 
From Exhibit 5 we could see that the closeness is extremely low, and the eigenvector is extremely high throughout the years. In the three graphs above, most of the nodes are marked as red (extreme low eigenvector), and very few is marked as blue and green (high eigenvector). From Exhibit7, we could observe the right skewness of eigenvector centrality and the two peaks of closeness centrality. These three evidence all imply that the overall network is not centralized when each node is given equal weights, and the network would become highly centralized when we use the importance of neighbor as weight. That is, important artists connect mostly to other important artists and also connect unimportant artists, while unimportant artists do not connect altogether themselves; Therefore, we conclude that the Spotify collaboration network has a core-periphery structure. For detailed yearly network stats, please refer to Exhibit8.
3. Positions of artists in the network has no significant correlation with artist’s popularity 
Three graphs colored by coreness and sized by popularity show that Popularity has no distinct relationship with Coreness or the position of a node. Thus, our assumption could not be hold by the network outlook, but we will further test it in our following regression model. 
		      
Regression Analysis
1. Regression variables
To find factors influencing on artists and tracks popularity, we run regressions using artists and tracks popularities as dependent variables respectively, which all have a normal distribution. 
For artists data, the predictors include Top Track, Compilation Number, Single Number, Genre Number, Star and Average Track Duration. The variables’ annotations are in Exhibition9. 
Social media exposure reflects popularity. We choose number of spotify followers to evaluate artists. Since the follower number is right skewed, we define the artists with top quantile number of followers as “star”, which is around one million followers.
Since part of the artists don’t have collaboration given a year, when researching on networks influence on artists popularities, we focus on artists who have had collaboration experience in the past ten years. The collaborative artists popularities are basically normally distributed. Based on our model above, predictors also include artists’ Jaccard similarity, degree and coreness.
For tracks data, we focus on collaborative tracks. The predictors include, Star Collaboration (0,1), Non-Star Collaboration (0,1), Compilation (0,1), Single (0,1), Duration and Artist Average Popularity. The variables’ annotations are in Exhibition10. 
The collaborative tracks popularities are basically normally distributed. Based on the model above, we also add Jaccard similarity as another predictor to account for the influence of collaboration.
2. Regression Models 
For yearly data on each artists’ attributes, we first treat it as panel data and apply fixed effect regression model controlling fixed effects for year and artists. To test if fixed effect model is significantly better than mixed effect model and significant differs from random effect model, we run other two model and apply F-test and Hausman Test separately. However, it turns out fixed effect regression doesn’t show edges. (Exhibition11)
We also find in the data that most of the artists don’t release songs every year. Every year, artist popularities are reevaluated so there is no effect from previous popularities.
We take artist data as section data and run regression with controlling the year factor:
Artist Popularity= Jaccard Similarity+Degree+Coreness+Top Track(0,1)+Compliation+Single+Genre Number+Duration+Star(0,1)+ factor(year)+ Constant Term
The track data is also section data, thus we decide to run regression with controlling for the year factor:
Track Popularity= Jaccard Similarity+Star Collaboration(0,1)+NonStar Collaboration(0,1)+Compliation(0,1)+Single(0,1)+Duration+Artist Popularity+ factor(year)+ Constant Term
3. Regression Results
The regression shows that track popularity, number of singles, and number of followers positively impact popularity while compilation number, genre number and track duration have negative impact. The outcomes are consistent. Then we focus on collaboration artists: after adding Jaccard similarity, degree and coreness into the regression, it turns out that Jaccard similarity has negative relationship with popularity, which means artists are more popular with fewer genres and of more minor types; both degree and coreness don’t have significant influence on popularity.
Digging into social network statistics, we can find there is non-linear relationship between Jaccard similarity and popularity. Looking into the losses graph between these two variables (Exhibition12), we apply quadratic polynomial transformation on Jaccard similarity, and add them into regression. It turns that the model outcomes improve marginally, and to keep models simple, it seems reasonable to run without polynomial terms.

The regression on collaborative tracks popularity shows that Star, Non-Star Collaboration, number of singles, duration and artist popularity have positive impact on track popularity. Adding Jaccard similarity we find it has positive relationship with popularity, which means tracks from majority style collaboration leads to more stream.
We can find Jaccard similarity and popularity have non-linear relationship. Looking into the losses graph (Exhibition13), we apply cubic polynomial transformation on Jaccard similarity, and add them into regression. It turns that the model outcomes again improves marginally.

Conclusion and Implications
Based on social network analysis and regression analysis above, we refer to our assumptions and draw our conclusions.
Conclusion1:  Over the years, the networks of artists collaboration shows a core-periphery structure. 
Conclusion2: More collaborations in one year not necessarily increase artists’ popularity. It’s more important to identify influence from collaboration type instead of number of collaborations.
Conclusion3: Core artists in a given year are not necessarily more popular. The central location of artists in a network do not benefit them in terms of popularity and streams.
Conclusion4: Artists of fewer genres or minority genres can be more popular. On track level, collaboration between artists with more similar genres is more likely to success.
These conclusions bring up some implications on artists and tracks success. Well-connected artists tend to collaborate with each other but that doesn’t promise their success. Reversely, people can get bored of constant collaboration from more-central artists while brand new collaboration can help add to tracks popularity. 
Tracks rise to fame mostly based on artist himself, and it’s not the best choice to collaborate intensively in one album with others. That is also why we can find most albums consist of mostly singles and observe fewer collaborations. However, it is not to say that collaboration is trivial, it is rather that artists, especially less famous artists need to more focus on developing his own style and not rush to broaden music style or seek collaboration with artists who has different style or more followers.  
